Thank you.
For me to do anything by halves is not my nature.
If I was going to sell any part of my collection, I was going to sell it all.
My book collection.
And that's how I feel.
If I was gonna sell any of my Chippendale furniture, I would sell the entire Chippendale collection.
If I'd sell any of the federal furniture, I'd sell a federal collection.
I'm not gonna cut the heart out of any collection and cheat the public.
Because if you sell something, let people come and buy and be offered the extent of what you've put together.
And that's how I feel.
Are you a victim of the recession?
No, nobody's a victim.
We all are in command of our own life.
And I'm a victim of myself.
I'm not a victim of any third party or third influence.
I'm not a victim, incidentally.
I'm in command of my own life.
I simply have to raise your money, and therefore I've got to figure out where to raise it from.
I simply have to raise some money and have to figure out where to raise it from.
That's all.
It's as simple as that.
I mean, there's no mystery.
There's no... Let's talk a little bit about the economy, if you want.
I mean, do you think that... See, the advertising business has had a big slowdown.
And my basic business is media, and that's the heart of advertising.
And advertisers have cut their budgets.
And that was complicated not only by the cutting of budgets because of the recession, but by the war in Iran, in Iraq, rather, has caused... In the Persian Gulf War.
In the Persian Gulf War.
The Persian Gulf War has caused a tremendous stoppage of advertising.
Stoppage of advertising aside...
This all affects what we do for a living, and cash flow is very important.
In order for us to continue to collect, we have to start shelling some things, which you have to understand is not abnormal.
Every collector that I've ever known sold part of his collection to acquire other things.
We never sold any of our collections to acquire anything.
In the 20 years of my marriage, I didn't have to sell part of my collection to acquire another part.
So the fact that I have to sell a small, I'm talking about 5% of my collection.
Let's go back to the verb have.
Do you have to sell this, by the way?
No, no, I don't have to, but if I would like.
Thank you very much, sir.
Thank you.
I haven't done anything yet.
I don't have to sell it.
But I would rather sell it than part with any more cash out of my cash reserves.
That's the difference.
I could simply write a check and sell a piece to buy.
I'd not sell anything.
But it gave me the, it started me thinking that, hey, what a marvelous opportunity to, hey, might get down to sell a piece and continue on.
Going back to the old craft table shooter and baccarat player, did you enjoy the run while you had it?
All the books.
I loved it.
And the one, you know, Mike Todd, let me tell you about Mike Todd.
In 1958, when I read Mike Todd's biography, I remember a very poignant question that was asked him.
They said, and this does not apply to me, but I want to give the example because it says a lot that may apply to me.
They said to Mike Todd, how does it feel to be poor?
And please, I'm not poor.
My collection is worth a hundred million bucks.
They said, Mike Todd, how does it feel to be poor?
And Mike said, I'm not poor.
I'm temporarily out of funds.
And that was the truth.
And it certainly was at a time before he produced Around the World in 80 Days.
So all I'm saying is that
I wish I could offer you the romance of having one of your subjects as a play, a romance?
No, no, no, that's okay.
I understand.
I wish I could offer you the ultimate romance of making this a depression kind of a situation.
No, no, no, believe me.
It's not.
It's just, it's not.
What it is is that... Times are tough.
Times are tough.
Rather than start to liquidate more cash, it's smarter to liquidate a little bit of the total collection.
And what I have to liquidate, unfortunately, is the thing that you are most interested in, and that I am very interested in, and that I am very interested in, is books.
You know where I'm coming from?
You don't owe anybody anything.
And the final analogy.
Touche.
Big, big, big fucking deal if you have to sell your books.
Exactly.
They were for sale when you bought them.
They're for sale now when you sell them.
You're more eloquent than I. You said it better than I could.
Who cares?
Exactly.
What difference does it make?
And the grand scheme of things.
The grand scheme of things.
I'm sorry.
Please.
I'm talking and I'm supposed to be listening.
No, no.
Sometimes, sometimes the great author is the one who has total comprehension of the subject.
How can you write well about a subject if you can't truly understand the total depth?
Well, there are guys who came into the field, saw the stuff, had the wherewithal to acquire it, who acquired it, paid big bucks.
Everybody did good.
The auction houses did well.
The booksellers did well.
The sellers did well.
And when I sell, I will do well.
You gave them a very nice home.
I surely did.
And now you're sending them off to a new life.
Which incidentally... So what's the problem?
And it's very important.
And if I say nothing else, because this is the crux and the hub of why the books are being sold aside from everything else I've told you.
I put collections together, which we give away.
But I have said this...
From the day I started buying books, and anybody who knows me, any dealer who knows me, any collector who knows me, knows this is Dick Manny, and this is not something I've invented for this interview or because of why I'm selling the books.
Very important.
The one thing I said I would do, no matter what, was sell my books at public auction when they came up for sale.
And you can check this with Jim, you can check this with Mark Hyatt, anybody who's been close to me.
and knows my philosophy, that if I had to sell my books, they would go to public sale and not to an institution.
The reason for this is I have always believed what every great book collector has known, that books must go back and have an opportunity to circulate in other hands.
It's not my paintings.
It's not like objects.
A book is a very special thing.
And to take those books out of circulation is a crime.
Because nobody sees a book in an institution unless he fills out a slip and has it handed to him.
They're not on the wall of museums.
They're not on the floors of museums like furniture or the walls of museums like paintings.
They're not out there for the public to see.
A book is something that is hidden, that is behind walls, that is behind closed doors, that no one, you give your book collection to an institution, it is gone forever.
It is out of sight, it is out of mind, except to those few people who live in a rarefied atmosphere, and only a small percentage of them.
They have to go into that institution, first of all, they've got to identify the institution,
They have to go to that institution.
They have to travel to it.
Justify themselves.
Fill out a slip and have somebody bring it to them and lay it out for them.
We don't believe that that is what fine works of literature or objects should be.
They should be in the hands of people who will love them, who will use them, who will read them, who will point them out to others, who will keep
the flame alive.
Good stuff.
Very good.
Good.
I fought the first Camelina in 20 years.
That came up at all?
Yeah.
You understand what I'm saying?
I'm sorry that you didn't pick my Camelina up because it would be more poignant.
In other words, I have been a forerunner in a lot of areas.
I reopened a lot of areas of book collecting with a passion.
And I had more of a universality, more of a... And I was in so many different areas.
Of course, I had so many interests, you know.
And I love the garden collection.
It's very stratified.
All the books that have meaning and the history of life.
You understand what I'm saying?
I'm going to go out and buy those books.
You know, give me a list.
And then go get a Quartz or, you know.
Patrick Freeman, or Tom Holland, Franklin.
Right, to go out and, you know, we'll get you the best examples.
Which is what they did.
Right.
But what I did was pick and choose all of my varied interests, which are very varied.
And that was, that's what...
But it was a high spot collection.
It was a high spot collection, but there's nothing I've ever... I will not buy a book... It is a high spot collection.
Yes, but let me say this to you.
There isn't a book that I ever bought that I didn't have an interest in and or read.
In other words, or manuscripts, whatever I've got.
It was a personal collection based on the things that moved me.
It wasn't?
Because somebody said, if you're going to build a film noir collection, which I did build.
A which?
A film noir collection of motion picture scripts.
And Peter Howard and company helped me build that.
But everything else that I put together,
was put together based on what I love, what I've read, and what I wanted the first example of.
It wasn't put together because if I'm going to build a high spot collection, this is what should be in my high spot collection.
There's no way.
Well, I saw the film about things at the Glover Club.
They were very, very, very impressive.
Best, best, best.
No one will ever say that whatever I put my hand to was not the best of its kind that I could afford.
That's a good quote.
Very important.
I have never bought a second-rate object knowingly.
Have you ever moved up?
Of course.
Where at one time I couldn't afford Chippendale furniture made by Thomas Chippendale out of his workshop.
I have a separate collection of just his things.
Which cost me millions to put together.
Does it give you a kick to go over to the Metropolitan and see your name in a couple of rooms there?
Sure it does.
I would be crazy if I said no.
Why?
Because everybody wants a little bit of immortality.
How do you reach immortality?
What does life or genetics...
This is a little nonsense philosophy.
What's it all about?
Immortality is a basic, I think, is a basic of nature.
And we all strive for immortality, kings and princes and everyday people.
And I'm just an everyday person.
How can I reach immortality?
One way is to leave my name.
and that of my family, to continue.
What do most men want out of life?
When it comes to leaving their name to go on, this is another way of doing it.
And to be able to have left a mark, to say I was here, as trite, and as...
As cliched as that sounds, we all would like to say that we were here.
One of the ways we can do that, aside from doing good works, is to leave a little bit of a legacy.
And if I can leave my name in an institution or two, if I can put a collection or two together that moves and teaches and instructs, what's wrong with that?
Let's go back to a year ago.
I don't think you were collecting, but I'm just really interested.
You said that there was a point where you were paying $60 a month for things, and your wife was paying $10 a week for things that you bought.
Oh, exactly, because of 20 years.
Yeah.
But what I'm curious about is how did Richard Manning, who was paying things on $60 time, become Richard Manning, who could afford to spend $500 a year?
What happened?
I started to make some money.
I went into business for 33 years.
Tell me a little bit about the past, because I don't know that much about it.
I was married in 1963.
You told me.
Good man, you remember me.
I was married in April of 1963.
I had already been in business for myself since July or June of 58.
And I divested myself at that point of partners that I had.
And I started to make money.
Doing what?
In the advertising and media world.
Selling.
Working for yourself or myself?
I've always worked for myself since I'm 22, since 1958.
And I don't want to say something about that.
I started in the advertising and media world, supplying stations across the country, TV, radio stations,
with incentive merchandise, which they could use to promote their stations by having giveaways, and they would pay me for this merchandise in advertising time, which I would then resell to my clients.
Very interesting.
Very clever.
Yeah, we were the first company to start the first independent media buying operation.
That's where you get to name media.
Exactly.
Actually, the name was Mediators, which changed to Mediators very quickly.
Mediators was a name that was given to me by a friend by the name of Don Purcell, who was at the time in the jingle business.
I went to Don, and I said, Don, I'm going into the business of trading merchandise with stations.
acquiring media he said you are a mediator and i said son of a gun it's a hell of a word and i called myself the mediators incorporated and it wasn't three weeks after i we came up with a name and incorporated it and people looked at the spelling and said oh yes mediators and after that i was the mediators it was impossible to continue pronouncing it mediators and uh what we were
were the first company that took media buying outside of the advertising agency and became the first independent company to buy and sell media.
Media meaning what?
Television and radio advertising.
We're not talking about... 30 and 60 second commercials.
Like a newspaper or a television.
No, we're talking about TV and radio.
Have I understood that you, somebody said that you actually brokered the sale of TV stations and newspapers or something?
No, that's wrong, right?
That's wrong.
okay we booked the sale of the commercial time and uh we're talking about abstractions time yes uh well there are abstractions on one hand but great realities on another because when you watch a commercial for kodak or xerox or any any you know major client uh they have spent hundreds of thousands of dollars or millions of dollars depending on purchasing
these 30- and 60-second commercials across the country.
And what we do is we try to get them the best buys from all these stations as humanly possible.
We negotiate these rates for them.
And I've built that business over the last... Just out of curiosity, where do you make your buck in this?
My buck is made in the difference between my cost of the advertising
and what they sell it for.
Very entrepreneurial.
And this is our basic business.
And what has happened over the years is that we offer our clients the ability to pay for that advertising, not only in cash, but with excess inventory.
To give you an example, a client is sitting with excess merchandise that he's manufactured, television sets,
Stereos, cars, I don't care what it is.
In order for the client to sell all of these tape recorders that he's got excess in, they sell, say, for $200 a piece wholesale, let's just say.
But if he's sitting with an overage of this stuff, if he wants to dump it into retail, he can't get $200 for it.
He's going to have to sell it maybe for $100.
Maybe less.
Or maybe less.
I come here and say, don't take a discount.
I'll pay you $200 for it.
So your books don't take a loss.
But take that $200 in media credits, not in cash.
Very good.
That's my business.
I love it.
You came up with this.
Yes.
That's what I do for that.
But when times become tough, as they are now.
When times become tough, advertisers cut their budgets, and so everybody gets hurt a little bit.
But, you know.
It's just cyclical.
It's happened to us three times.
Do you expect that this will watch out?
Oh, it's old.
Within the next year or two, we're going to be back bigger and better than ever.
And we've seen this happen three times before.
You have tremendous... Pardon me.
I think it's in the American economy.
There's no question about that.
I still believe as the world goes... As the world goes, so does America.
As America goes, so does the world.
I don't care about Japan.
I don't care about anybody else.
A lot of other people care about Japan.
That's marvelous, but I will tell you that America is the deciding factor.
If we were to have a very negative cash problem over an extended period of time, it would affect the entire world.
Do you agree with the estimates that we have 10 years to get our act in order?
No.
I think... I shouldn't say that.
You're saying we have 10 years to get our act in order?
Yes.
I've never heard that expression before, but I think you're right.
I think we've got 10 years to get our act in order.
I think if we continue down this road for the next 10 years, the way we're going is not good.
But right now, we are the absolute deciding factor of how the world goes.
We're still the biggest and largest economy in the world.
And as much as Japan has all the banking and all the cash flow at this point, without American business, without American finance, without American trade, the world will fall apart.
Ten years from now, it's going to be a totally different subject.
But I believe we're going to pick up and wake up in very short order.
I'm one of the three, four or five most important book collectors at the time
that we're talking about right now.
Yet, you must understand that in the whole oeuvre of my collection, the whole meaning of my collection is 5% of what I collect.
And that you will see when you come to the house.
Question.
Go ahead.
Yes.
Go for it.
Go ahead.
Ask a question.
Some people have suggested that you're the Donald Trump of the book world.
I don't know whether to be flattered or not to be, but I will tell you this.
The people who really know me know that I am not a flash in the pan.
For 28 years we've put together collections and given them away, and therefore it belies any statement to that effect.
The reason for the sale of the books is because of some immediate cash needs, as we talked about prior to this.
And books are something I can realize the right amount of money on based on the true value.
But more importantly, I'm flattered that I've even been able to make the kind of a mark with some of my enemies who are so jealous as to want to relate to me to Donald Trump.
I take that as a compliment and I would very much want you to keep that in the book.